Aspergillom
a 
An aspergilloma, also known as a mycetoma or fungus 
ball, is a clump of mold which exists in a body cavity 
such as a paranasal sinus or an organ such as the lung. 
By definition, it is caused by fungi of the genus 
Aspergillus,[1] but Zygomycota and Fusarium may also 
form similar structures.[2] 
1 Etiology 
 
Histopathology of aspergilloma, H&E staining 
The most common organ affected by aspergilloma is the 
lung. Aspergilloma mainly affects people with 
underlying cavitary lung disease such as tuberculosis or 
emphysema, or systemic immunodeficiency. Aspergillus 
fumigatus, the most common causative species, is 
typically inhaled as small (2 to 3 micron) spores. The 
fungus settles in a cavity and is able to grow free from 
interference because critical elements of the immune 
system are unable to penetrate into the cavity. As the 
fungus multiplies, it forms a ball, which incorporates 
dead tissue from the surrounding lung, mucus, and other 
debris.[3] 
2 Clinical syndrome 
People with aspergillomata typically remain 
asymptomatic until the condition is fairly advanced; in 
some cases even for decades. Diagnosis is often made as 
a result of an incidental finding on a chest X-ray or CT 
scan that may be performed as part of the workup for 
another unrelated condition. However, a small 
percentage of aspergillomata invade into a blood vessel 
which can result in bleeding. Thus, the most common 
symptom of associated with aspergillomata is coughing 
up blood (hemoptysis). Although in rare cases this may 
result in life-threatening hemorrhage, the amount of 
blood lost is usually inconsequential. 
Aspergillomata can also form in other organs. They 
can form abscesses in solid organs such as the brain or 
kidney, usually in people who are 
immunocompromised. They can also develop within 
body cavities such as the sphenoid or paranasal 
sinuses,[4] the ear canal, and on surfaces such as heart 
valves. 
3 Treatment 
Most cases of aspergilloma do not require treatment. 
Treatment of diseases which increase the risk of 
aspergilloma, such as tuberculosis, may help to 
prevent their formation. In cases complicated by 
severe hemoptysis or other associated conditions such 
as pleural empyema or pneumothorax, surgery may be 
required to remove the aspergilloma and stop the 
bleeding. There has been interest in treatment with 
antifungal medications such as itraconazole, none has 
yet been shown to reliably eradicate aspergillomata. 
Although most fungi — especially Aspergillus — fail 
to grow in healthy human tissue, significant growth 
may occur in people whose adaptive immune system 
is compromised, such as those with chronic 
granulomatous disease, who are undergoing 
chemotherapy, or who have recently undergone a bone 
marrow transplantation. Within the lungs of such 
individuals the fungal hyphae spread out as a spherical 
growth. With restoration of normal defense 
mechanisms, neutrophils and lymphocytes are 
attracted to the edge of the spherical fungal growth 
where they lyse, releasing tissue-digesting enzymes as 
a normal function. A sphere of infected lung is thus 
cleaved from the adjacent lung. This sphere flops 
around in the resulting cavity and is recognized on x-
ray as a fungus ball but is really a “lung ball”. This 
process is beneficial as a potentially serious invasive 
fungal infection is converted into surface colonization. 
Although the fungus is inactivated in the process, 
surgeons may choose to operate to reduce the 
possibility of bleeding. Microscopic examination of 
surgically removed recently formed fungus balls 
clearly show a sphere of dead lung containing fungal 
hyphae. Microscopic examination of older lesions 
reveal mummified tissue which may reveal faint 
residual lung or hyphal structures.[5] 
1 
2 5 EXTERNAL LINKS 
 
