 Community-acquired 
pneumonia 
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) refers to pneumonia (any of several lung diseases) contracted by a 
person with little contact with the healthcare system. The chief difference between hospital-acquired pneumonia 
(HAP) and CAP is that patients with HAP live in long-term care facilities or have recently visited a hospital. CAP 
is common, affecting people of all ages, and its symptoms occur as a result of oxygen-absorbing areas of the lung 
(alveoli) filling with fluid. This inhibits lung function, causing dyspnea, fever, chest pains and cough. 
CAP, the most common type of pneumonia, is a leading cause of illness and death worldwide. Its causes include 
bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites.[1] CAP is diagnosed by assessing symptoms, making a physical examination 
and on x-ray. Other tests, such as sputum examination, supplement chest x-rays. Patients with CAP sometimes 
require hospitalization, and it is treated primarily with antibiotics, antipyretics and cough medicine.[2] Some forms 
of CAP can be prevented by vaccination and by abstaining from tobacco products.[3] 
1 Signs and symptoms 1.1 Common symptoms 
Main symptoms of infectious 
Pneumonia 
 
• Shortness of breath (dyspnea) 
• Coughing which produces greenish or yellow sputum 
• A highshiverinfeveg r, accompanied by sweating, chills and 
• Sharp, stabbing chest pains 
• Rapid, shallow, often-painful breathing 
2 
1.2 Less-common symptoms 
• Coughing up blood (hemoptysis) 
• Headaches, including migraines 
• Loss of appetite 
• Excessive fatigue 
• Bluish skin (cyanosis) 
• Nausea 
• Vomiting 
• Diarrhea 
• Joint pain (arthralgia) 
• Muscle aches (myalgia) 
• Rapid heartbeat 
• Dizziness or lightheadedness 
1.3 In the elderly 
• New or worsening confusion 
• Hypothermia 
• Poor coordination, leading to falls 
1.4 In infants 
• Unusual sleepiness 
• Yellowing of the skin (jaundice) 
• Difficulty feeding[4] 
1 
3 
2 Causes 
Over 100 microorganisms can cause CAP, with most cases caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae. Certain groups 
of people are more susceptible to CAP-causing pathogens; for example, infants, adults with chronic conditions 
(such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, senior citizens, alcoholics and others with compromised immune 
systems are more likely to develop CAP from Haemophilus influenzae or Pneumocystis carinii.[5] A definitive 
cause is identified in only half the cases. 
2.1 Infants 
Infants can acquire lung infections before birth by breathing infected amniotic fluid or through a blood-borne 
infection which crossed the placenta. Infants can also inhale contaminated fluid from the vagina at birth. The most 
prevalent pathogen causing CAP in newborns is Streptococcus agalactiae, also known as group-B streptococcus 
(GBS). GBS causes more than half of CAP in the first week after birth.[6] Other bacterial causes of neonatal CAP 
include Listeria monocytogenes and a variety of mycobacteria. CAP-causing viruses may also be transferred from 
mother to child; herpes simplex virus (the most common) is life-threatening, and adenoviridae, mumps and 
enterovirus can also cause pneumonia. Another cause of CAP in this group is Chlamydia trachomatis, acquired at 
birth but not causing pneumonia until two to four weeks later; it usually presents with no fever and a characteristic, 
staccato cough. 
CAP in older infants reflects increased exposure to microorganisms, with common bacterial causes including 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Moraxella catarrhalis and Staphylococcus 
aureus. Maternally-derived syphilis is also a cause of CAP in this age group. Viruses include human respiratory 
syncytial virus (RSV), human metapneumovirus, adenovirus, human parainfluenza viruses, influenza and 
rhinovirus, and RSV is a common source of illness and hospitalization in infants.[7] CAP caused by fungi or 
parasites is not usually seen in otherwise-healthy infants. 
2.2 Children 
Although children older than one month tend to be at risk for the same microorganisms as adults, children under 
five are much less likely to have pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae or 
Legionella pneumophila. In contrast, older children and teenagers are more likely to acquire Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumoniae than adults.[8] 
 3 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
2.3 Adults 
A full spectrum of microorganisms is responsible for CAP in adults, and patients with certain risk factors are more 
susceptible to infections of certain groups of microorganisms. Identifying people at risk for infection by these 
organisms aids in appropriate treatment. Many lesscommon organisms can cause CAP in adults, and are identified 
from specific risk factors or treatment failure for common causes. 
2.4 Risk factors 
Some patients have an underlying problem which increases their risk of infection. Some risk factors are: 
4 
• Obstruction: When part of the airway (bronchus) leading to the alveoli is obstructed, the lung cannot 
eliminate fluid; this can lead to pneumonia. One cause of obstruction, especially in young children, is 
inhalation of a foreign object such as a marble or toy. The object lodges in a small airway, and pneumonia 
develops in the obstructed area of the lung. Another cause of obstruction is lung cancer, which can block the 
flow of air. 
• Lung disease: Patients with underlying lung disease are more likely to develop pneumonia. Diseases such as 
emphysema and habits such as smoking result in more-frequent and more-severe bouts of pneumonia. In 
children, recurrent pneumonia may indicate cystic fibrosis or pulmonary sequestration. 
• Immune problems: Immune-deficient patients, such as those with HIV/AIDS, are more likely to develop 
pneumonia. Other immune problems range from severe childhood immune deficiencies, such as Wiskott–
Aldrich syndrome, to the less-severe common variable immunodeficiency.[9] 
3 Pathophysiology 
CAP’s symptoms are the result of lung infection by microorganisms and the immune system's response to the 
infection. Mechanisms of infection are different for viruses and other microorganisms. 
3.1 Viruses 
Viruses cause 20 percent of CAP cases. The most common viruses are influenza, parainfluenza, human respiratory 
syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus and adenovirus. Less-common viruses which may cause serious illness 
include chickenpox, SARS, avian flu and 
hantavirus.[10] 
Typically, a virus enters the lungs through the inhalation of water droplets and invades the cells lining the airways 
and the alveoli. This leads to cell death; the cells are killed by the virus or they self-destruct. Further lung damage 
occurs when the immune system responds to the infection. White blood cells, particularly lymphocytes, activate 
chemicals known as cytokines which cause fluid to leak into the alveoli. The combination of cell destruction and 
fluid-filled alveoli interrupts the transportation of oxygen into the bloodstream. In addition to their effects on the 
lungs, many viruses affect other organs. Viral infections weaken the immune system, making the body more 
susceptible to bacterial infection (including bacterial pneumonia). 
3.2 Bacteria and fungi 
Although most cases of bacterial pneumonia are caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae, infections by atypical 
bacteria such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila can also 
cause CAP. Enteric gram-negative bacteria, such as Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae, are a group of 
bacteria that typically live in the large intestine; contamination of food and water by these bacteria can result in 
outbreaks of pneumonia. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an uncommon cause of CAP, is a difficult bacteria to treat. 
Bacteria and fungi typically enter the lungs through the inhalation of water droplets, although they can reach the 
lung through the bloodstream if an infection is present and often live in the respiratory tract. In the alveoli, bacteria 
and fungi travel into the spaces between cells and adjacent alveoli through connecting pores. The immune system 
responds by releasing neutrophil granulocytes, white blood cells responsible for attacking microorganisms, into 
the lungs. The neutrophils engulf and kill the microorganisms, releasing cytokines which activate the entire 
immune system. This response causes fever, chills and fatigue, common symptoms of CAP. The neutrophils, 
bacteria and fluids leaked from surrounding blood vessels fill the alveoli, impairing oxygen transport. Bacteria 
may travel from the lung to the bloodstream, causing septic shock (very low blood pressure which damages the 
brain, kidney, and heart). 
5 
3.3 Parasites 
A variety of parasites can affect the lungs, generally entering the body through the skin or by being swallowed. 
They then travel to the lungs through the blood, where the combination of cell destruction and immune response 
disrupts oxygen transport. 
4 Diagnosis 
Patients with symptoms of CAP require evaluation. Physical examination by a health provider may reveal fever, 
an increased respiratory rate (tachypnea), low blood pressure (hypotension), a fast heart rate (tachycardia) and 
changes in the amount of oxygen in the blood. Palpating the chest as it expands and tapping the chest wall 
(percussion) to identify dull, non-resonant areas can identify stiffness and fluid, signs of CAP. 
Listening to the lungs with a stethoscope (auscultation) can also reveal signs associated with CAP. A lack of normal 
breath sounds or the presence of crackles can indicate fluid consolidation. Increased vibration of the chest when 
speaking, known as tactile fremitus, and increased volume of whispered speech during auscultation can also 
indicate fluid.[11] 
When signs are discovered, chest X-rays, examination of the blood and sputum for infectious microorganisms and 
blood tests are commonly used to diagnose CAP. Diagnostic tools depend on the severity of illness, local practices 
and concern about complications of the infection. All patients with CAP should have their blood oxygen monitored 
with pulse oximetry. In some cases, arterial blood gas analysis may be required to determine the amount of oxygen 
in the blood. A complete blood count (CBC) may reveal extra white blood cells, indicating infection. 
Chest X-rays and X-ray computed tomography (CT) can reveal areas of opacity (seen as white), indicating 
consolidation. CAP does not always appear on x-rays, because the disease is in its initial stages or involves a 
part of the lung an x-ray does not see well. In some cases, chest CT can reveal pneumonia not seen on x-rays. X-
rays can often mislead, as Heart failure or other types of lung damage can mimic CAP on x-rays.[12] 
Several tests can identify the cause of CAP. Blood cultures can isolate bacteria or fungi in the bloodstream. Sputum 
Gram staining and culture can also reveal the causative microorganism. In severe cases, bronchoscopy can collect 
fluid for culture. Special tests can be performed if an uncommon microorganism is suspected, such as urinalysis 
for Legionella antigen in Legionnaires’ disease. 
6 
5 Treatment 
 
Chest X-rays of a CAP patient before (left) and after treatment 
CAP is treated with an antibiotic that kills the offending microorganism and by managing complications. If the 
causative microorganism is unidentified (often the case), the laboratory identifies the most-effective antibiotic; 
this may take several days. 
Health professionals consider a person’s risk factors for various organisms when choosing an initial antibiotic. 
Additional consideration is given to the treatment setting; most patients are cured by oral medication, while others 
must be hospitalized for intravenous therapy or intensive care. 
Therapy for older children and adults generally includes treatment for atypical bacteria: typically a macrolide 
antibiotic (such as azithromycin or clarithromycin) or a quinolone, such as levofloxacin. Doxycycline is the 
antibiotic of choice in the UK for atypical bacteria, due to increased clostridium difficile colitis in hospital patients 
linked to the increased use of clarithromycin. 
5.1 Newborns 
Most newborn infants with CAP are hospitalized, receiving IV ampicillin and gentamicin for at least ten days to 
treat the common causative agents streptococcus agalactiae, listeria monocytogenes and escherichia coli. To treat 
5 TREATMENT 
the herpes simplex virus, IV aciclovir is administered for 21 days. 
5.2 Children 
Treatment of CAP in children depends on the child’s age and the severity of illness. Children under five are not 
usually treated for atypical bacteria. If hospitalization is not required, a seven-day course of amoxicillin is often 
7 
prescribed. With the increase in drug-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae, antibiotics such as cefpodoxime may 
become more popular.[13] Hospitalized children receive intravenous ampicillin, ceftriaxone or cefotaxime, and a 
recent study found that a three-day course of antibiotics seems sufficient for most mild-to-moderate CAP in 
children.[14] 
5.3 Adults 
In 2001 the American Thoracic Society, drawing on the work of the British and Canadian Thoracic Societies, 
established guidelines for the management of adult CAP dividing patients into four categories based on common 
organisms:[15] 
• Healthy outpatients without risk factors: This group (the largest) is composed of otherwise-healthy patients 
without risk factors for DRSP, enteric gramnegative bacteria, pseudomonas or other, lesscommon, causes of 
CAP. Primary microoganisms are viruses, atypical bacteria, penicillin-sensitive streptococcus pneumoniae 
and haemophilus influenzae. Recommended drugs are macrolide antibiotics, such as azithromycin or 
clarithromycin, for seven[16] to ten days. • Outpatients with underlying illness or risk factors: Although this 
group does not require hospitalization, patients have underlying health problems (such as emphysema or 
heart failure) or are at risk for DRSP or enteric gram-negative bacteria. They are treated with a quinolone 
active against streptococcus pneumoniae (such as levofloxacin) or a β-lactam antibiotic (such as cefpodoxime, 
cefuroxime, amoxicillin or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid) and a macrolide antibiotic, such as azithromycin or 
clarithromycin, for seven to ten days.[17] 
• Hospitalized patients without risk for pseudomonas: This group requires intravenous antibiotics, with a 
quinolone active against streptococcus pneumoniae (such as levofloxacin), a β-lactam antibiotic (such as 
cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, ampicillin/sulbactam or high-dose ampicillin plus a macrolide antibiotic (such as 
azithromycin or clarithromycin) for seven to ten days. 
• Intensive-careaeruginosa: These patients require antibiotics tarpatients at risk for pseudomonasgeting this 
difficult-to-eradicate bacterium. One regimen is an intravenous antipseudomonal betalactam such as 
cefepime, imipenem, meropenem or piperacillin/tazobactam, plus an IV antipseudomonal fluoroquinolone 
such as levofloxacin. Another is an IV antipseudomonal beta-lactam such as cefepime, imipenem, 
meropenem or piperacillin/tazobactam, plus an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin or tobramycin, plus a 
macrolide (such as azithromycin) or a nonpseudomonal fluoroquinolone such as ciprofloxacin. 
For mild-to-moderate CAP, shorter courses of antibiotics 
(3–7 days) seem to be sufficient.[14] 
5.4 Hospitalization 
Some CAP patients require intensive care, with clinical prediction rules such as the pneumonia severity index and 
CURB-65 guiding the decision to hospitalize.[18] Factors increasing the need for hospitalization include: 
• Age greater than 65 
• Underlying chronic illnesses 
• Respiratory rate greater than 30 per minute 
• Systolic blood pressure less than 90 mmHg 
• Heart rate greater than 125 per minute 
8 
• Temperature below 35 or over 40 °C 
• Confusion 
• Evidence of infection outside the lung 
Laboratory results indicating hospitalization include: 
• Arterial oxygen tension less than 60 mm Hg 
• Carbon dioxidwhile breathing room aire over 50 mmHg or pH under 7.35 
• Hematocrit under 30 percent 
• Creatininover 20 mg/dle over 1.2 mg/dl or blood urea nitrogen 
• White-blood-cell count under 4 × 10^9/L or over 30× 10^9/L 
• Neutrophil count under 1 x 10^9/L 
X-ray findings indicating hospitalization include: 
• Involvement of more than one lobe of the lung 
• Presence of a cavity 
• Pleural effusion 
6 Prognosis 
The CAP outpatient mortality rate is less than one percent, with fever typically responding to the first two days of 
therapy and other symptoms in the first week. However, X-rays may remain abnormal for at least a month. 
Hospitalized patients have an average mortality rate of 12 percent, with the rate rising to 40 percent for patients 
with bloodstream infections or requiring intensive care.[19] Factors increasing mortality are identical to those 
indicating hospitalization. 
Unresponsive CAP may be due to a complication, a previously-unknown health problem, inappropriate antibiotics 
for the causative organism, a previouslyunsuspected microorganism (such as tuberculosis) or a condition 
mimicking CAP (such as granuloma with polyangiitis). Additional tests include X-ray computed tomography, 
bronchoscopy or lung biopsy. 
7 Complications 
Major complications of CAP include: 
• Sepsis, when microorganisms enter the bloodstream and the immune system responds. Sepsis often occurs 
with bacterial pneumonia, with streptococcus pneumoniae the most-common cause. Patients with sepsis 
9 
require intensive care, with blood-pressure monitoring and support against hypotension. Sepsis can cause 
liver, kidney and heart damage. 
• Respiratory failure: CAP patients often have dyspnea, which may require support. Non-invasive machines 
(such as bilevel positive airway pressure), a tracheal tube or a ventilator may be used. 
• Pleural effusion and empyema: Microorganisms from the lung may trigger fluid collection in the pleural 
cavity. If the microorganisms are in the fluid, the collection is an empyema. If pleural fluid is present, it 
should be collected with a needle and examined. Depending on the results, complete drainage of the fluid 
with a chest tube may be necessary. If the fluid is not drained, bacteria may continue to proliferate because 
antibiotics do not penetrate the pleural cavity well. 
• Abscess: A pocket of fluid and bacteria may be seen on an X-ray as a cavity in the lung. Abscesses, typical 
of aspiration pneumonia, usually contain a mixture of anaerobic bacteria. Although antibiotics can usually 
cure abscesses, sometimes they require drainage by a surgeon or radiologist. 
8 Epidemiology 
CAP is common worldwide, and a major cause of death in all age groups. In children, most deaths (over two 
million a year) occur in newborn period. According to a World Health Organization estimate, one in three newborn 
deaths are from pneumonia.[20] Mortality decreases with age until late adulthood, with the elderly at risk for CAP 
and its associated mortality. 
More CAP cases occur during the winter than at other times of the year. CAP is more common in males than 
females, and more common in black people than Caucasians. Patients with underlying illnesses (such as 
Alzheimer’s disease, cystic fibrosis, COPD, tobacco smoking, alcoholism or immune-system problems) have an 
increased risk of developing pneumonia.[21] 
9 Prevention 
CAP may be prevented by treating underlying illnesses increasing its risk, by smoking cessation and vaccination 
of children and adults. Vaccination against haemophilus influenzae and streptococcus pneumoniae in the first year 
of life has reduced their role in childhood CAP. A vaccine against streptococcus pneumoniae, available for adults, 
is recommended for healthy individuals over 65 and all adults with COPD, heart failure, diabetes mellitus, 
cirrhosis, alcoholism, cerebrospinal fluid leaks or who have had a splenectomy. Re-vaccination may be required 
after five or ten years.[22] 
Patients who are vaccinated against streptococcus pneumoniae, health professionals, nursing-home residents and 
pregnant women should be vaccinated annually against influenza.[23] During an outbreak, drugs such as 
amantadine, rimantadine, zanamivir and oseltamivir have been demonstrated to prevent influenza.[24] 
10 See also 
• Bacterial pneumonia 
• Viral pneumonia 
• Fungal pneumonia 
• Parasitic pneumonia 
