 Atrial 
fibrillation 
Atrial fibrillation (AF or A-fib) is an abnormal heart rhythm characterized by rapid and irregular beating.[1] Often 
it starts as brief periods of abnormal beating which become longer and possibly constant over time.[2] Most 
episodes have no symptoms.[3] Occasionally there may be heart palpitations, fainting, shortness of breath, or chest 
pain.[4] The disease increases the risk of heart failure, dementia, and stroke.[3] 
Hypertension and valvular heart disease are the most common alterable risk factors for AF.[5][6] Other heartrelated 
risk factors include heart failure, coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, and congenital heart disease.[5] In the 
developing world valvular heart disease often occurs as a result of rheumatic fever.[7] Lung-related risk factors 
include COPD, obesity, and sleep apnea.[3] Other factors include excess alcohol intake, diabetes mellitus, and 
thyrotoxicosis.[3][7] However, half of cases are not associated with one of these risks.[3] Diagnosis is by feeling the 
pulse which may be confirmed using an electrocardiogram (ECG).[8] The ECG shows no P waves and an irregular 
ventricular rate.[8] 
AF is often treated with medications to slow the heart rate to a near normal range (known as rate control) or to 
convert the rhythm to normal sinus rhythm (known as rhythm control).[5] Electrical cardioversion can also be used 
to convert AF to a normal sinus rhythm and is often used emergently if the person is unstable.[9] Ablation may 
prevent recurrence in some people.[10] Depending on the risk of stroke either aspirin or anti-clotting medications 
such as warfarin may be recommended.[3] While these medications reduce this risk, they increase rates of major 
bleeding.[11] 
Atrial fibrillation is the most common abnormal heart rhythm.[3] In Europe and North America, as of 2014, it 
affects about 2% to 3% of the population.[2] This is an increase from 0.4 to 1% of the population around 2005.[12] 
In the developing world about 0.6% of males and 0.4% of females are affected. The percentage of people with AF 
increases with age with 0.14% under 50 years old, 4% between 60 and 70 years old, and 14% over 80 years old 
being affected.[2] A-fib and atrial flutter resulted in 112,000 deaths in 2013, up from 29,000 in 1990.[13] The first 
known report of an irregular pulse was by John Baptist Senac in 1749. This was first documented by ECG in 
1909 by Thomas Lewis.[3] 
1 Signs and symptoms 
AF is usually accompanied by symptoms related to a rapid heart rate. Rapid and irregular heart rates may be 
perceived as palpitations or exercise intolerance and occasionally may produce anginal chest pain (if the high 
heart rate causes ischemia). Other possible symptoms include congestive symptoms such as shortness of breath 
or swelling. The arrhythmia is sometimes only identified with the onset of a stroke or a transient ischemic attack 
(TIA). It is not uncommon for a patient to first become aware of AF from a routine physical examination or 
ECG, as it often does not cause symptoms.[12] 
Since most cases of AF are secondary to other medical problems, the presence of chest pain or angina, signs and 
symptoms of hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland) such as weight loss and diarrhea, and symptoms 
suggestive of lung disease can indicate an underlying cause. A history of stroke or TIA, as well as high blood 
pressure, diabetes, heart failure, or rheumatic fever may indicate whether someone with AF is at a higher risk 
of complications.[12] The risk of a blood clot forming in the left atrium, breaking off, and then traveling in the 
bloodstream can be assessed using the CHADS2 score or CHA2DS2-VASc score. 
1.1 Rapid heart rate 
Presentation is similar to other forms of rapid heart rate and may be asymptomatic.[14] Palpitations and chest 
discomfort are common complaints.[14] The rapid uncoordinated heart rate may result in reduced cardiac output, 
with the heart being unable to provide adequate blood flow and therefore oxygen delivery to the rest of the body. 
Common symptoms of uncontrolled atrial fibrillation may include shortness of breath,[14] shortness of breath 
when lying flat, dizziness, and sudden onset of shortness of breath during the night. This may progress to 
swelling of the lower extremities, a manifestation of congestive heart failure. Due to inadequate cardiac output, 
2 
individuals with AF may also complain of lightheadedness,[14] may feel like they are about to faint, or may 
actually lose consciousness. 
AF can cause respiratory distress due to congestion in the lungs. By definition, the heart rate will be greater than 
100 beats per minute. Blood pressure may be variable, and often difficult to measure as the beat-by-beat 
variability causes problems for most digital (oscillometric) 
1 
non-invasive blood pressure monitors. For this reason, when determining heart rate in AF, direct cardiac 
auscultation is recommended. Low blood pressure is most concerning and a sign that immediate treatment is 
required. Many of the symptoms associated with uncontrolled atrial fibrillation are a manifestation of congestive 
heart failure due to the reduced cardiac output. Respiratory rate will be increased in the presence of respiratory 
distress. Pulse oximetry may confirm the presence of hypoxia related to any precipitating factors such as 
pneumonia. Examination of the jugular veins may reveal elevated pressure (jugular venous distention). Lung exam 
may reveal crackles, which are suggestive of pulmonary edema. Heart exam will reveal a rapid irregular rhythm. 
2 Causes 
AF is linked to several forms of cardiovascular disease, but may occur in otherwise-normal hearts. Cardiovascular 
factors known to be associated with the development of AF include high blood pressure, coronary artery disease, 
mitral stenosis (e.g., due to rheumatic heart disease or mitral valve prolapse), mitral regurgitation, left atrial 
enlargement hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), pericarditis, congenital heart disease, and previous heart 
surgery. Additionally, lung diseases (such as pneumonia, lung cancer, pulmonary embolism, and sarcoidosis) are 
thought to play a role in certain people. Disorders of breathing during sleep such as obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 
are also associated with AF.[15] Obesity is a risk factor for AF.[16] Hyperthyroidism and subclinical hyperthyroidism 
are associated with AF development.[17] Caffeine consumption does not appear to be associated with AF,[18] but 
excessive alcohol consumption ("binge drinking" or "holiday heart syndrome") is linked to 
AF.[19] 
2.1 Genetics 
A family history of AF may increase the risk of AF. A study of more than 2,200 people with AF found that 30 
percent had parents with AF.[20] Various genetic mutations may be responsible.[21][22] 
Four types of genetic disorder are associated with atrial fibrillation:[23] 
• Familial AF as a monogenic disease 
• Familial AF presenting in the setting of another inherited cardiac disease (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
dilated cardiomyopathy, familial amyloidosis) 
• Inherited arrhythmic syndromes (congenital long QT syndrome, short QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome) 
 3 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
• Non-familial AF associated with genetic backgrounds (polymorphism in the ACE gene) that may predispose 
to atrial fibrillation 
3 
3 Pathophysiology 
In AF, the normal regular electrical impulses generated by the sinoatrial node in the right atrium of the heart are 
overwhelmed by disorganized electrical impulses usually originating in the roots of the pulmonary veins. This 
leads to irregular conduction of ventricular impulses that generate the heartbeat. 
3.1 Pathology 
The primary pathologic change seen in atrial fibrillation is the progressive fibrosis of the atria. This fibrosis is due 
primarily to atrial dilation, however genetic causes and inflammation may have a cause in some individuals. 
Dilation of the atria can be due to almost any structural abnormality of the heart that can cause a rise in the pressure 
within the heart. This includes valvular heart disease (such as mitral stenosis, mitral regurgitation, and tricuspid 
regurgitation), hypertension, and congestive heart failure. Any inflammatory state that affects the heart can cause 
fibrosis of the atria. This is typically due to sarcoidosis but may also be due to autoimmune disorders that create 
autoantibodies against myosin heavy chains. Mutation of the lamin AC gene is also associated with fibrosis of the 
atria that can lead to atrial fibrillation. 
Once dilation of the atria has occurred, this begins a chain of events that leads to the activation of the renin 
aldosterone angiotensin system (RAAS) and subsequent increase in matrix metalloproteinases and disintegrin, 
which leads to atrial remodeling and fibrosis, with loss of atrial muscle mass. This process is not immediate, and 
experimental studies have revealed patchy atrial fibrosis may precede the occurrence of atrial fibrillation and may 
progress with prolonged durations of atrial fibrillation. 
Fibrosis is not limited to the muscle mass of the atria, and may occur in the sinus node (SA node) and 
atrioventricular node (AV node), correlating with sick sinus syndrome. Prolonged episodes of atrial fibrillation 
have been shown to correlate with prolongation of the sinus node recovery time,[12] suggesting that dysfunction of 
the SA node is progressive with prolonged episodes of atrial fibrillation. 
3.2 Electrophysiology 
The normal electrical conduction system of the heart allows the impulse that is generated by the sinoatrial node 
(SA node) of the heart to be propagated to and stimulate the myocardium (muscular layer of the heart). When 
4.1 Screening 
the myocardium is stimulated, it contracts. It is the ordered stimulation of the myocardium that allows efficient 
contraction of the heart, thereby allowing blood to be pumped to the body. 
There are multiple theories about the etiology of atrial fibrillation. An important theory is that, in atrial fibrillation, 
the regular impulses produced by the sinus node for a normal heartbeat are overwhelmed by rapid electrical 
discharges produced in the atria and adjacent parts of the pulmonary veins. Sources of these disturbances are either 
automatic foci, often localized at one of the pulmonary veins, or a small number of localized sources in the form 
of either reentrant electrical spiral waves (rotors) or repetitive focal beats; these localized sources may be found 
in the left atrium near the pulmonary veins or in a variety of other locations through both the left or right atrium.  
Because recovery of the atria from excitation is heterogeneous, the electrical waves generated by the AF sources 
undergo repetitive, spatially distributed breakup and fragmentation in a process known as “fibrillatory conduction”. 
Another theory is the multiple wavelet theory first formulated by Moe,[24] which was experimentally proven by 
Allessie et al. 
AF can be distinguished from atrial flutter (AFL), which appears as an organized electrical circuit usually in the 
right atrium. AFL produces characteristic saw-toothed F-waves of constant amplitude and frequency on an ECG 
whereas AF does not. In AFL, the discharges circulate rapidly at a rate of 300 beats per minute (bpm) around the 
atrium. In AF, there is no regularity of this kind, except at the sources where the local activation rate can exceed 
500 bpm. 
Although the electrical impulses of AF occur at a high rate, most of them do not result in a heart beat. A heart beat 
results when an electrical impulse from the atria passes through the atrioventricular (AV) node to the ventricles 
4 
and causes them to contract. During AF, if all of the impulses from the atria passed through the AV node, there 
would be severe ventricular tachycardia, resulting in severe reduction of cardiac output. This dangerous situation 
is prevented by the AV node since its limited conduction velocity reduces the rate at which impulses reach the 
ventricles during AF.[25] 
4 Diagnosis 
The evaluation of atrial fibrillation involves determination of the cause of the arrhythmia, and classification of the 
arrhythmia. Diagnostic investigation of AF typically includes a complete history and physical examination, ECG, 
transthoracic echocardiogram, complete blood count, and serum thyroid stimulating hormone level.[14] Depending 
upon given resources, afflicted individuals may benefit from an in-depth evaluation that 
 
A 12-lead ECG showing atrial fibrillation at approximately 150 beats per minute 
may include correlation of the heart rate response to exercise, exercise stress testing, chest X-ray, transesophageal 
echocardiography, and other studies. 
If a patient presents with a sudden onset of severe symptoms, other forms of abnormal heart rhythm with high 
heart rate must be ruled-out, as some may be immediately life-threatening, such as ventricular tachycardia. While 
most patients will be placed on continuous cardiorespiratory monitoring, an ECG is essential for diagnosis. 
Provoking causes should be sought out. A common cause of any tachycardia is dehydration, as well as other forms 
of hypovolemia. Acute coronary syndrome should be ruled out. Intercurrent illness such as pneumonia may be 
present. 
4.1 Screening 
In general, screening for atrial fibrillation is not performed. Screening in those 65 years and older has been studied 
and been found to increase the number of cases of atrial fibrillation detected.[26] 
4.2 Minimal evaluation 
In general, the minimal evaluation of atrial fibrillation should be performed in all individuals with AF. The goal 
of this evaluation is to determine the general treatment regimen for the individual. If results of the general 
evaluation warrant it, further studies may then be performed. 
4.2.1 History and physical examination 
The history of the individual’s atrial fibrillation episodes is probably the most important part of the evaluation. 
Distinctions should be made between those who are entirely asymptomatic when they are in AF (in which case 
the AF is found as an incidental finding on an ECG or physical examination) and those who have gross and obvious 
symptoms due to AF and can pinpoint whenever they go into AF or revert to sinus rhythm. 
5 
4.2.2 Routine bloodwork 
While many cases of AF have no definite cause, it may be the result of various other problems. Hence, kidney 
function and electrolytes are routinely determined, as well as thyroid-stimulating hormone (commonly suppressed 
in hyperthyroidism and of relevance if amiodarone is administered for treatment) and a blood count.[12] 
In acute-onset AF associated with chest pain, cardiac troponins or other markers of damage to the heart muscle 
may be ordered. Coagulation studies (INR/aPTT) are usually performed, as anticoagulant medication may be 
commenced.[12] 
4.2.3 Electrocardiogram 
 
ECG of atrial fibrillation (top) and normal sinus rhythm (bottom). The purple arrow indicates a P wave, which is lost in atrial 
fibrillation. 
Atrial fibrillation is diagnosed on an electrocardiogram (ECG), an investigation performed routinely whenever an 
irregular heart beat is suspected. Characteristic findings are the absence of P waves, with disorganized electrical 
activity in their place, and irregular R-R intervals due to irregular conduction of impulses to the ventricles.[12] At 
very fast heart rates atrial fibrillation may look more regular, which may make it more difficult to separate from 
SVT or ventricular tachycardia.[27] 
QRS complexes should be narrow, signifying that they are initiated by normal conduction of atrial electrical 
activity through the intraventricular conduction system. Wide QRS complexes are worrisome for ventricular 
tachycardia, although in cases where there is disease of the conduction system, wide complexes may be present 
in A-Fib with rapid ventricular response. 
If paroxysmal AF is suspected but an ECG during an office visit shows only a regular rhythm, AF episodes may 
be detected and documented with the use of ambulatory Holter monitoring (e.g., for a day). If the episodes are too 
infrequent to be detected by Holter monitoring with reasonable probability, then the patient can be monitored for 
longer periods (e.g., a month) with an ambulatory event monitor.[12] 
 4 DIAGNOSIS 
4.2.4 Echocardiography 
In general, a non-invasive transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) is performed in newly diagnosed AF, as well as if 
there is a major change in the patient’s clinical state. This ultrasound-based scan of the heart may help identify 
valvular heart disease (which may greatly increase the risk of stroke), left and right atrial size (which indicates 
likelihood that AF may become permanent), left ventricular size and function, peak right ventricular pressure 
(pulmonary hypertension), presence of left atrial thrombus (low sensivity), presence of left ventricular 
hypertrophy and pericardial disease.[12] 
Significant enlargement of both the left and right atria is associated with long-standing atrial fibrillation and, if 
noted at the initial presentation of atrial fibrillation, suggests that the atrial fibrillation is likely to be of a longer 
duration than the individual’s symptoms. 
6 
4.3 Extended evaluation 
In general, an extended evaluation is not necessary in most individuals with atrial fibrillation, and is performed 
only if abnormalities are noted in the limited evaluation, if a reversible cause of the atrial fibrillation is suggested, 
or if further evaluation may change the treatment course. 
4.3.1 Chest X-ray 
In general, a chest X-ray is performed only if a pulmonary cause of atrial fibrillation is suggested, or if other 
cardiac conditions are suspected (in particular congestive heart failure.) This may reveal an underlying problem 
in the lungs or the blood vessels in the chest.[12] In particular, if an underlying pneumonia is suggested, then 
treatment of the pneumonia may cause the atrial fibrillation to terminate on its own. 
4.3.2 Transesophageal echocardiogram 
A normal echocardiography (transthoracic or TTE) has a low sensitivity for identifying blood clots in the heart. If 
this is suspected (e.g., when planning urgent electrical cardioversion) a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE or 
TOE where British spelling is used) is preferred.[12] 
The TEE has much better visualization of the left atrial appendage than transthoracic echocardiography. This 
structure, located in the left atrium, is the place where a blood clot forms in more than 90% of cases in nonvalvular 
(or non-rheumatic) atrial fibrillation or flutter.[28] TEE has a high sensitivity for locating thrombi in this area[29] 
and can also detect sluggish bloodflow in this area that is suggestive of blood clot formation.[30] 
If no blood clot is seen on TEE, the incidence of stroke, 
(immediately after cardioversion is performed), is very low. 
4.3.3 Ambulatory Holter monitoring 
A Holter monitor is a wearable ambulatory heart monitor that continuously monitors the heart rate and heart 
rhythm for a short duration, typically 24 hours. In individuals with symptoms of significant shortness of breath 
with exertion or palpitations on a regular basis, a holter monitor may be of benefit to determine whether rapid 
heart rates (or unusually slow heart rates) during atrial fibrillation are the cause of the symptoms. 
4.3.4 Exercise stress testing 
Some individuals with atrial fibrillation do well with normal activity but develop shortness of breath with exertion. 
It may be unclear whether the shortness of breath is due to a blunted heart rate response to exertion caused by 
excessive atrioventricular node-blocking agents, a very rapid heart rate during exertion, or other underlying 
conditions such as chronic lung disease or coronary ischemia. An exercise stress test will evaluate the individual’s 
heart rate response to exertion and determine if the AV node blocking agents are contributing to the symptoms. 
4.4 Classification 
The American College of Cardiology (ACC), American Heart Association (AHA), and the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC) recommend in their guidelines the following classification system based on simplicity and 
clinical relevance.[12] 
All people with AF are initially in the category called first detected AF. These patients may or may not have had 
previous undetected episodes. If a first detected episode stops on its own in less than 7 days and then another 
episode begins later on, the category changes to paroxysmal AF. Although patients in this category have episodes 
lasting up to 7 days, in most cases of paroxysmal AF the episodes will stop in less than 24 hours. If the episode 
lasts for more than 7 days, it is unlikely to stop on its own,[31] and is then known as persistent AF. In this case, 
7 
cardioversion can be used to stop the episode. If cardioversion is unsuccessful or not attempted and the episode 
continues for a long time (e.g., a year or more), the patient’s AF is then known as permanent. 
Episodes that last less than 30 seconds are not considered in this classification system. Also, this system does not 
apply to cases where the AF is a secondary condition that occurs in the setting of a primary condition that may be 
the cause of the AF. 
About half of people have permanent AF while a quarter have paroxysmal and a quarter have persistent AF.[2] 
In addition to the above four AF categories, which are mainly defined by episode timing and termination, the 
ACC/AHA/ESC guidelines describe additional AF categories in terms of other characteristics of the patient.[12] 
• Lone atrial fibrillation (LAF) – absence of clinical or echocardiographic findings of other cardiovascular 
disease (including hypertension), related pulmonary disease, or cardiac abnormalities such as enlargement of 
the left atrium, and age under 60 years 
• Nonvalvular AF – absence of rheumatic mitral valve disease, a prosthetic heart valve, or mitral valve repair 
• Secondary AF – occurs in the setting of a primary condition that may be the cause of the AF, such as acute 
myocardial infarction, cardiac surgery, pericarditis, myocarditis, hyperthyroidism, pulmonary embolism, 
pneumonia, or other acute pulmonary disease 
5 Management 
Main article: Management of atrial fibrillation 
The main goals of treatment are to prevent circulatory instability and stroke. Rate or rhythm control are used to 
achieve the former, whereas anticoagulation is used to decrease the risk of the latter.[32] If cardiovascularly unstable 
due to uncontrolled tachycardia, immediate cardioversion is indicated.[12] 
5.1 Anticoagulation 
Anticoagulation can be used to reduce the risk of stroke from AF. Anticoagulation is recommended in most people 
other than those at low risk of stroke[33] or those at high risk of bleeding. 
The risk of stroke from nonvalvular AF can be estimated using the CHA2DS2-VASc score. For nonvalvular AF, 
anticoagulation is recommended if there is a score of 2 or more, not using anticoagulation may be considered if 
there is a score of 1, and not using anticoagulation is reasonable if there is a score of 0.[34] 
Anticoagulation can be achieved through a number of means including warfarin,[35] heparin, dabigatran, 
rivaroxaban[36] and apixaban.[36] Aspirin is less effective in reducing the risk of stroke and may not be safer with 
respect to major bleeding (including intracranial bleeding) than well-managed warfarin or a non-vitamin K oral 
anticoagulant (NOAC).[37] A number of issues should be considered, including: cost of NOACs, risk of stroke, 
risk of falls, compliance, and speed of desired onset of 
anticoagulation.[38] 
For those with non-valvular atrial fibrillation, the NOACs (rivaroxaban, dabigatran, apixaban) are not superior 
nor worse than warfarin in preventing non-hemorrhagic stroke and systemic embolic events.[39][40] They have a 
lower risk of intracranial bleeding compared to warfarin; however, dabigatran is associated with a higher risk of 
gastrointestinal bleeding.[39][40] 
5.2 Rate versus rhythm control 
There are two ways to approach atrial fibrillation using medications: rate control and rhythm control. Both 
methods have similar outcomes.[41] Rate control lowers the heart rate closer to normal, usually 60 to 100 bpm, 
without trying to convert to a regular rhythm. Rhythm control tries to restore a normal heart rhythm in a process 
8 
called cardioversion and maintains the normal rhythm with medications. Studies suggest that rhythm control is 
more important in the acute setting AF, whereas rate control is more important in the chronic phase. 
There is no difference in risk of stroke in people having converted to a normal rhythm with anti-arrhythmic 
treatment compared to those with only rate control.[42] AF is associated with a reduced quality of life, and, while 
some studies indicate that rhythm control leads to a higher quality of life, some did not find a difference.[43] 
A further study focused on rhythm control in people with AF with heart failure, based on the idea that AF increases 
mortality in this group. In this setting, rhythm control offered no advantage compared to rate control.[44] 
In those with a fast ventricular response, intravenous magnesium significantly increases the chances of successful 
rate and rhythm control in the urgent setting without major side-effects.[45] A person with poor vital signs, mental 
status changes, preexcitation, or chest pain often will go to immediate treatment with synchronized DC 
cardioversion.[12] Otherwise the decision of rate control versus rhythm control using drugs is made. This is based 
on a number of criteria that includes whether or not symptoms persist with rate control. 
5.3 Rate control 
Rate control to a target heart rate of 110 bpm is recommended in most people.[46] This is achieved with medications 
that work by increasing the degree of block at the level of the AV node, decreasing the number of impulses that 
conduct into the ventricles. This can be done 
with:[12][47] 
• Beta blockers (preferably the “cardioselective” beta blockers such as metoprolol, atenolol, bisoprolol, 
nebivolol) 
• Non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers 
(e.g., diltiazem or verapamil) 
 5 MANAGEMENT 
• Cardiac glycosides (e.g., digoxin) – have less use, apart from in older people who are sedentary. They are not 
as good as either beta blockers or calcium channel blockers.[5] 
In those with chronic disease either beta blockers or calcium channel blockers are recommended.[46] 
In addition to these agents, amiodarone has some AV node blocking effects (in particular when administered 
intravenously), and can be used in individuals when other agents are contraindicated or ineffective (particularly 
due to hypotension). 
5.4 Cardioversion 
Cardioversion is the attempt to switch an irregular heartbeat to a normal heartbeat using electrical or chemical 
means.[12] 
• Electrical cardioversion involves the restoration of normal heart rhythm through the application of a DC 
electrical shock. Exact placement of the pads does not appear important.[48] 
• Chemical cardioversion is performed with drugs, such as amiodarone, dronedarone,[49] procainamide, 
dofetilide, ibutilide, propafenone, or flecainide. 
After successful cardioversion the heart may be in a stunned state, which means that there is a normal rhythm but 
restoration of normal atrial contraction has not yet occurred.[50] 
9 
5.5 Ablation 
In young patients with little-to-no structural heart disease where rhythm control is desired and cannot be 
maintained by medication or cardioversion, then radiofrequency ablation or cryoablation may be attempted and is 
preferred over years of drug therapy.[12][51] Although radiofrequency ablation is becoming an accepted intervention 
in selected younger patients, there is currently a lack of evidence that ablation reduces all-cause mortality, stroke, 
or heart failure.[52] There are two ongoing clinical trials (CABANA [Catheter Ablation Versus Antiarrhythmic Drug 
Therapy for Atrial Fibrillation] and EAST [Early Therapy of Atrial Fibrillation for Stroke Prevention Trial]) that 
should provide new information for assessing whether AF catheter ablation is superior to more standard therapy.[53] 
The Maze procedure, first performed in 1987, is an effective invasive surgical treatment that is designed to create 
electrical blocks or barriers in the atria of the heart, forcing electrical impulses that stimulate the heartbeat to travel 
down to the ventricles. The idea is to force abnormal electrical signals to move along one, uniform path to 
6.2 Mitral valve 
the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles), thus restoring the normal heart rhythm.[54] 
5.6 Following surgery 
AF often occurs after cardiac surgery and is usually self-limiting. It is strongly associated with age, pre-operative 
hypertension, and the number of vessels grafted. Measures should be taken to control hypertension pre-operatively 
to reduce the risk of AF. Also, people with a higher risk of AF, e.g., people with preoperative hypertension, more 
than 3 vessels grafted, or greater than 70 years of age, should be considered for prophylactic treatment. 
Postoperative pericardial effusion is also suspected to be the cause of atrial fibrillation. Prophylaxis may include 
prophylactic post-operative rate and rhythm management. Some authors perform posterior pericardiotomy to 
reduce the incidence of postoperative AF.[55] When AF occurs, management should primarily be rate and rhythm 
control. However, cardioversion may be employed if the person is haemodynamically unstable, highly 
symptomatic, or persists for 6 weeks after discharge. In persistent cases anticoagulation should be used. 
6 Prognosis 
6.1 Thromboembolism 
See also: CHADS score 
6.1.1 Prediction of embolism 
Determining the risk of an embolism causing a stroke is important for guiding the use of anticoagulants. The most 
accurate clinical prediction rules are:[56] 
• CHADS2 
• CHA2DS2-VASc 
Both the CHADS2 and the CHA2DS2-VASc score predict future stroke risk in people with a-fib with CHA2DS2-
VASc]] being more accurate. Some that had a CHADS2 score of 0 had a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 3, with a 3.2% 
annual risk of stroke. Thus a CHA2DS2VASc score of 0 is considered very low risk.[57] 
10 
6.1.2 Mechanism of thrombus formation 
In atrial fibrillation, the lack of an organized atrial contraction can result in some stagnant blood in the left atrium 
(LA) or left atrial appendage (LAA). This lack of movement of blood can lead to thrombus formation (blood 
clotting). If the clot becomes mobile and is carried away by the blood circulation, it is called an embolus. An 
embolus proceeds through smaller and smaller arteries until it plugs one of them and prevents blood from flowing 
through the artery. This process results in end organ damage due to loss of nutrients, oxygen, and removal of 
cellular waste products. Emboli in the brain may result in an ischemic stroke or a transient ischemic attack (TIA). 
More than 90% of cases of thrombi associated with non-valvular atrial fibrillation evolve in the left atrial 
appendage.[28] However, the LAA lies in close relation to the free wall of the left ventricle and thus the LAA’s 
emptying and filling, which determines its degree of blood stagnation, may be helped by the motion of the wall 
of the left ventricle, if there is good ventricular function.[58] 
If the LA is enlarged, there is an increased risk of thrombi that originate in the LA. Moderate to severe, non-
rheumatic, mitral regurgitation (MR) reduces this risk of stroke.[59] This risk reduction may be due to a beneficial 
swirling effect of the MR blood flow into the LA.[60] 
6.2 Mitral valve 
Atrial fibrillation and a corresponding enlargement of the left atrium may cause an increase in size of the mitral 
valve annulus.[61] 
With a sinus rhythm, the mitral annulus undergoes dynamic changes during the cardiac cycle. For example, at the 
end of diastole the annular area is smaller than at the end of systole. A possible reason for this dynamic size 
difference is that the coordinated contraction of the left atrium acts like a sphincter about the mitral annulus and 
reduces its size. This may be important for mitral valve competence so that it does not leak when the left ventricle 
pumps blood. However, when the left atrium fibrillates, this sphincter action is not possible and may contribute 
to, or result in, mitral regurgitation in some cases.[61] 
7 Epidemiology 
Atrial fibrillation is the most common arrhythmia.[12] In Europe and North America as of 2014 it affects about 2% 
to 3% of the population.[2] This is an increase from 0.4 to 1% of the population around 2005.[12] In the developing 
world rates are about 0.6% for males and 0.4% 
for females.[2] 
It also accounts for one-third of hospital admissions for cardiac rhythm disturbances,[12] and the rate of admissions 
for AF has risen in recent years.[62] Strokes from AF account for 6–24% of all ischemic strokes.[63] After a transient 
ischemic attack or stroke about 11% are found to have a new diagnosis of atrial fibrillation.[64] Between 3 and 11% 
of those with AF have structurally normal hearts.[65] Approximately 2.2 million individuals in the United States 
and 4.5 million in the European Union have AF.[12] 
The number of new cases each year of atrial fibrillation increases with age. In individuals over the age of 80 it 
affects about 8%.[12] In developed countries, the number of patients with atrial fibrillation is likely to increase 
during the next 50 years, owing to the growing proportion of elderly individuals.[66] 
8 History 
Because the diagnosis of atrial fibrillation requires measurement of the electrical activity of the heart, atrial 
fibrillation was not truly described until 1874, when Edmé Félix Alfred Vulpian observed the irregular atrial 
electrical behavior that he termed “fremissement fibrillaire” in dog hearts.[67] In the mid-eighteenth century, 
JeanBaptiste de Sénac made note of dilated, irritated atria in people with mitral stenosis.[68] The irregular pulse 
associated with AF was first recorded in 1876 by Carl Wilhelm Hermann Nothnagel and termed “delirium cordis”, 
11 
stating that "[I]n this form of arrhythmia the heartbeats follow each other in complete irregularity. At the same 
time, the height and tension of the individual pulse waves are continuously changing”.[69] Correlation of delirium 
cordis with the loss of atrial contraction as reflected in the loss of a waves in the jugular venous pulse was made 
by Sir James MacKenzie in 1904.[70] Willem Einthoven published the first ECG showing AF in 1906.[71] The 
connection between the anatomic and electrical manifestations of AF and the irregular pulse of delirium cordis 
was made in 1909 by Carl Julius Rothberger, Heinrich Winterberg, and Sir Thomas Lewis.[72][73][74] 
9 See also 
Ventricular fibrillation 
 
