Foreign 
body 
For other uses of this term, see foreign body (disambiguation). 
A foreign body or sometimes known as FB (Latin: corpus alienum) is any object originating outside the body. In 
machinery, it can mean any unwanted intruding object. 
Most references to foreign bodies involve propulsion through natural orifices into hollow organs. 
Foreign bodies can be inert or irritating. If they irritate they will cause inflammation and scarring. They can bring 
infection into the body or acquire infectious agents and protect them from the body’s immune defenses. They can 
obstruct passageways either by their size or by the scarring they cause. Some can be toxic. 
With sufficient force (as in firing of bullets), a foreign body can become lodged into nearly any tissue. 
1 Alimentary tract 
Main article: Foreign body in alimentary tract 
One of the most common locations for a foreign body is 
 
A coin seen on AP CXR in the esophagus 
the alimentary tract. 
It is possible for foreign bodies to enter the tract from the mouth, or from the rectum. 
Both children and adults experience problems caused by foreign objects getting stuck in their bodies. Young chil- 
 A coin seen on lateral CXR in the esophagus 
dren, in particular, are naturally curious and may intentionally put shiny objects, such as coins or button batteries, 
into their mouths. They also like to stick things in their ears and up their noses.[1] The effect of a foreign body 
can be very different. For example, a coin causes local pressure on the tissue but generally, is not a medical 
emergency to remove. A button battery, which can be a very similar size to a coin, generates hydroxide ions at 
the anode and causes a chemical burn in 2 hours.[2] An ingested button battery that is stuck in the esophagus is 
a medical emergency. In 2009, Avolio Luigi and Martucciello Giuseppe showed that although ingested 
nonmagnetic foreign bodies are likely to be passed spontaneously without consequence, ingested magnets 
(magnetic toys) may attract each other through children’s intestinal walls and cause severe damage, such as 
pressure necrosis, perforation, intestinal fistulas, volvulus, and obstruction.[3] 
2 Airways 
Main article: airway management 
It is possible for a foreign body to enter the airways and cause choking.[4] 
In one study, peanuts were the most common obstruction.[5] In addition to peanuts, hot dogs, and 
1 
grapes, latex balloons are also a serious choking hazard in children that can result in death. A latex balloon will 
conform to the shape of the trachea, blocking the airway and making it difficult to expel with the Heimlich 
maneuver.[6] 
Foreign body in the bronchi can also present as chronic cough.[7] 
3 Eyes 
Airborne particles can lodge in the eyes of people at any age. These foreign bodies often result in allergies which 
are either temporary or even turn into a chronic allergy. This is especially evident in the case of dust particles. 
It is also possible for larger objects to lodge in the eye. The most common cause of intraocular foreign bodies is 
hammering.[8] 
2 6 OTHER 
4 Skin 
 
Surgical suture. H&E stain. 
Splinters are common foreign bodies in skin. Staphylococcus aureus infection often causes boils to form around 
them.[9] 
Tetanus prophylaxis may be appropriate.[10] 
5 Peritoneum 
Foreign bodies in the peritoneum can include retained surgical instruments after abdominal surgery. Rarely, an 
intrauterine device can perforate the uterine wall and enter the peritoneum. 
Foreign bodies in the peritoneum eventually become contained in a foreign body granuloma. In the extremely rare 
case of retained ectopic pregnancy, this forms a lithopedion 
6 Other 
 
Foreign material in a blood vessel due to an embolization procedure. 
 Talcosis of the lung due to intravenous drug use. H&E stain. 
Foreign bodies can also become lodged in other locations: 
• anus or rectum[11] 
• blood vessels or thoracic system[12] 
• ears[13] 
• nose[14] 
• urethra[15] 
• vagina[16] 
 
Bottle top swallowed by a dog 
 Needle swallowed by a cat 
7 In other animals 
Foreign bodies are common in animals, especially dogs and cats. Dogs will readily eat toys, bones, and any object 
that either has food on it or retains the odor of food. Unlike humans, dogs are susceptible to gastrointestinal 
obstruction due to their ability to swallow relatively large objects and pass them through the esophagus. Foreign 
bodies most commonly become lodged in the stomach because of the inability to pass through the pyloric sphincter, 
and in the jejunum. Symptoms of gastrointestinal obstruction include vomiting, abdominal pain, and depression 
due to dehydration. Peritonitis results if either the stomach or intestine has ruptured. Foreign bodies in the stomach 
can sometimes be removed by endoscopic retrieval or if necessary by gastrotomy. Foreign bodies in the jejunum 
are removed by enterotomy. 
Certain foreign bodies in animals are especially problematic. Bones or objects with sharp edges may cause tearing 
of the wall of the esophagus, stomach, or small intestine and lead to peritonitis. Pennies swallowed in large 
numbers may cause zinc poisoning, which in dogs leads to severe gastroenteritis and hemolytic anemia. Linear 
foreignbodies can especially be dangerous. A linear foreign body is usually a length of string or yarn with a larger 
ob3 
ject or clump of material at either end. One end is usually lodged in the stomach or proximal small intestine and 
the other end continues to travel through the intestines. The material becomes tightly stretched and the intestines 
may “accordion up” on themselves or be lacerated by it.[17] This is especially common in cats who may enjoy 
playing with a ball of string or yarn. Sometimes the linear foreign body anchors in the mouth by catching under 
the tongue.[18] Pantyhose is a common linear foreign body in dogs. 
8 See also 
• 101 Things Removed from the Human Body 
 
