 Heart 
failure 
Heart failure (HF), often referred to as chronic heart failure (CHF), occurs when the heart is unable to pump 
sufficiently to maintain blood flow to meet the body’s needs.[1][2][3] The terms congestive heart failure (CHF) or 
congestive cardiac failure (CCF) are often used interchangeably with chronic heart failure.[4] Signs and 
symptoms commonly include shortness of breath, excessive tiredness, and leg swelling.[5] The shortness of breath 
is usually worse with exercise, while lying down, and may wake the person at night.[5] A limited ability to exercise 
is also a common feature.[6] 
Common causes of heart failure include coronary artery disease including a previous myocardial infarction (heart 
attack), high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation, valvular heart disease, excess alcohol use, infection, and 
cardiomyopathy of an unknown cause.[5][7] These cause heart failure by changing either the structure or the 
functioning of the heart.[5] There are two main types of heart failure: heart failure due to left ventricular 
dysfunction and heart failure with normal ejection fraction depending on if the ability of the left ventricle to 
contract is affected, or the heart’s ability to relax.[5] The severity of disease is usually graded by the degree of 
problems with exercise.[8] Heart failure is not the same as myocardial infarction (in which part of the heart muscle 
dies) or cardiac arrest (in which blood flow stops altogether).[9][10] Other diseases that may have symptoms similar 
to heart failure include obesity, kidney failure, liver problems, anemia and thyroid disease.[8] 
The condition is diagnosed based on the history of the symptoms and a physical examination with confirmation 
by echocardiography.[11] Blood tests, electrocardiography, and chest radiography may be useful to determine the 
underlying cause.[11] Treatment depends on the severity and cause of the disease.[11] In people with chronic stable 
mild heart failure, treatment commonly consists of lifestyle modifications such as stopping smoking,[12] physical 
exercise,[13] and dietary changes, as well as medications.[12] In those with heart failure due to left ventricular 
dysfunction, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers along with beta blockers 
are recommended.[11] For those with severe disease, aldosterone antagonists, or hydralazine plus a nitrate may be 
used.[11] Diuretics are useful for preventing fluid retention.[12] Sometimes, depending on the cause, an implanted 
device such as a pacemaker or an implantable cardiac defibrillator may be recommended.[11] In some moderate or 
severe cases cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) may be suggested[14] or cardiac contractility modulation 
may be of benefit.[15] A ventricular assist device or occasionally a heart transplant may be recommended in those 
with severe disease despite all other measures.[12] 
Heart failure is a common, costly, and potentially fatal condition.[7] In developed countries, around 2% of adults 
have heart failure and in those over the age of 65, this increases to 6–10%.[7][16] In the year after diagnosis the 
risk of death is about 35% after which it decreases to below 10% each year.[5] This is similar to the risks with a 
number of types of cancer.[5] In the United Kingdom the disease is the reason for 5% of emergency hospital 
admissions.[5] Heart failure has been known since ancient times with the Ebers papyrus commenting on it around 
1550 BCE.[6] 
1 Terminology 
Heart failure is a physiological state in which cardiac output is insufficient to meet the needs of the body and 
lungs. The termed “congestive heart failure” (CHF) is often used as one of the common symptoms is swelling 
or water 
retention.[17] 
Heart failure is divided into two different types: heart failure due to reduced ejection fraction (HFREF) also 
known as heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction or systolic heart failure and heart failure with 
preserved ejection fraction (HFPEF) also known as diastolic heart failure or heart failure with normal ejection 
fraction (HFNEF).[5][13] Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction occurs when the ejection fraction is less than 
40%.[18] In diastolic heart failure, the heart muscle contracts well but the ventricle does not fill with blood well 
in the relaxation phase.[5] Ejection fraction is the proportion of blood in the heart pumped out of the heart during 
a single contraction.[19] It is a percentage with normal being between 50 and 75%.[19] 
2 
The term “acute” is used to mean rapid onset, and “chronic” refers to long duration. Chronic heart failure is a 
long term situation, usually with stable treated symptomatology. Acute decompensated heart failure is worsening 
or decompensated heart failure, referring to episodes in which a person can be characterized as having a change 
in heart failure signs and symptoms resulting in death or an urgent need for therapy or hospitalization. [20] Heart 
failure may also occur in situations of “high output,” (termed "high output cardiac failure") where the 
1 
ventricular systolic function is normal but the heart cannot deal with an important augmentation of blood 
volume.[21] 
2 Signs and symptoms 
 
A man with congestive heart failure and marked jugular venous distension. External jugular vein marked by an arrow. 
Heart failure symptoms are traditionally and somewhat arbitrarily divided into “left” and “right” sided, 
recognizing that the left and right ventricles of the heart supply different portions of the circulation. However, 
heart failure is not exclusively backward failure (in the part of the circulation which drains to the ventricle). 
There are several other exceptions to a simple left-right division of heart failure symptoms. Additionally, the most 
common cause of right-sided heart failure is leftsided heart failure.[22] The result is that patients commonly present 
with both sets of signs and symptoms. 
2.1 Left-sided failure 
Common respiratory signs are increased rate of breathing and increased work of breathing (non-specific signs of 
respiratory distress). Rales or crackles, heard initially in the lung bases, and when severe, throughout the lung 
fields suggest the development of pulmonary edema (fluid in the alveoli). Cyanosis which suggests severe 
hypoxemia, is a late sign of extremely severe pulmonary edema. Additional signs indicating left ventricular failure 
include 2 SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS 
3 
a laterally displaced apex beat (which occurs if the heart is enlarged) and a gallop rhythm (additional heart sounds) 
may be heard as a marker of increased blood flow, or increased intra-cardiac pressure. Heart murmurs may indicate 
the presence of valvular heart disease, either as a cause (e.g. aortic stenosis) or as a result (e.g. mitral regurgitation) 
of the heart failure. 
Backward failure of the left ventricle causes congestion of the lungs’ blood vessels, and so the symptoms are 
predominantly respiratory in nature. Backward failure can be subdivided into failure of the left atrium, the left 
ventricle or both within the left circuit. The patient will have dyspnea (shortness of breath) on exertion and in 
severe cases, dyspnea at rest. Increasing breathlessness on lying flat, called orthopnea, occurs. It is often measured 
in the number of pillows required to lie comfortably, and in orthopnea, the patient may resort to sleeping while 
sitting up. Another symptom of heart failure is paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea: a sudden nighttime attack of severe 
breathlessness, usually several hours after going to sleep. Easy fatigability and exercise intolerance are also 
common complaints related to respiratory compromise. 
"Cardiac asthma" or wheezing may occur. 
Compromise of left ventricular forward function may result in symptoms of poor systemic circulation such as 
dizziness, confusion and cool extremities at rest. 
2.2 Right-sided failure 
 
Severe peripheral edema 
Physical examination may reveal pitting peripheral edema, ascites, and liver enlargement. Jugular venous pressure 
is frequently assessed as a marker of fluid status, which can be accentuated by eliciting hepatojugular reflux. If 
the right ventricular pressure is increased, a parasternal heave may be present, signifying the compensatory 
increase in contraction strength. 
3.2 Acute decompensation 
Backward failure of the right ventricle leads to congestion of systemic capillaries. This generates excess fluid 
accumulation in the body. This causes swelling under the skin (termed peripheral edema or anasarca) and usually 
affects the dependent parts of the body first (causing foot and ankle swelling in people who are standing up, and 
sacral edema in people who are predominantly lying down). Nocturia (frequent nighttime urination) may occur 
when fluid from the legs is returned to the bloodstream while lying down at night. In progressively severe cases, 
ascites (fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity causing swelling) and liver enlargement may develop. 
Significant liver congestion may result in impaired liver function, and jaundice and even coagulopathy (problems 
of decreased blood clotting) may occur. 
4 
2.3 Biventricular failure 
Dullness of the lung fields to finger percussion and reduced breath sounds at the bases of the lung may suggest 
the development of a pleural effusion (fluid collection in between the lung and the chest wall). Though it can occur 
in isolated left- or right-sided heart failure, it is more common in biventricular failure because pleural veins drain 
into both the systemic and pulmonary venous systems. When unilateral, effusions are often right sided. 
3 Causes 
3.1 Congestive heart failure 
Heart failure may also occur in situations of “high output,” (termed "high output cardiac failure") where the 
ventricular systolic function is normal but the heart cannot deal with an important augmentation of blood 
volume.[21] This can occur in overload situation (blood or serum infusions), kidney diseases, chronic severe anemia, 
beriberi (vitamin B1/thiamine deficiency), thyrotoxicosis, Paget’s disease, arteriovenous fistulae, or arteriovenous 
malformations. 
Viral infections of the heart can lead to inflammation of the muscular layer of the heart and subsequently contribute 
to the development of heart failure. Heart damage can predispose a person to develop heart failure later in life and 
has many causes including systemic viral infections (e.g., HIV), chemotherapeutic agents such as daunorubicin 
and trastuzumab, and abuse of drugs such as alcohol and methamphetamine. Additionally, infiltrative disorders 
such as amyloidosis and connective tissue diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus have similar 
consequences. Obstructive sleep apnea (a condition of sleep wherein disordered breathing overlaps with obesity, 
hypertension, and/or diabetes) is regarded as an independent cause of heart failure. 
3.2 Acute decompensation 
Main article: Acute decompensated heart failure 
Chronic stable heart failure may easily decompensate. This most commonly results from an intercurrent illness 
(such as pneumonia), myocardial infarction (a heart attack), abnormal heart rhythms, uncontrolled hypertension, 
or a patient’s failure to maintain a fluid restriction, diet, or medication.[23] Other well recognized factors that may 
worsen CHF include the following: anemia and hyperthyroidism which place additional strain on the heart muscle, 
excessive fluid or salt intake, and medication that causes fluid retention such as NSAIDs and thiazolidinediones.[24] 
NSAIDs in general increase the risk twofold.[25] 
4 Pathophysiology 
Heart failure is caused by any condition which reduces the efficiency of the heart muscle, through damage or 
overloading. As such, it can be caused by a wide number of conditions, including myocardial infarction (in which 
the heart muscle is starved of oxygen and dies), hypertension (which increases the force of contraction needed to 
pump blood) and amyloidosis (in which misfolded proteins are deposited in the heart muscle, causing it to stiffen). 
Over time these increases in workload will produce changes to the heart itself: 
The heart of a person with heart failure may have a reduced force of contraction due to overloading of the ventricle. 
In a healthy heart, increased filling of the ventricle results in increased contraction force (by the Frank– Starling 
law of the heart) and thus a rise in cardiac output. In heart failure this mechanism fails, as the ventricle is loaded 
with blood to the point where heart muscle contraction becomes less efficient. This is due to reduced ability to 
cross-link actin and myosin filaments in overstretched heart muscle.[26] 
A reduced stroke volume may occur as a result of a failure of systole, diastole or both. Increased end systolic 
volume is usually caused by reduced contractility. Decreased end diastolic volume results from impaired 
ventricular filling; this occurs when the compliance of the ventricle falls (i.e. when the walls stiffen). As the heart 
works harder to meet normal metabolic demands, the amount cardiac output can increase in times of increased 
5 
oxygen demand (e.g., exercise) is reduced. This contributes to the exercise intolerance commonly seen in heart 
failure. This translates to the loss of one’s cardiac reserve, or the ability of the heart to work harder during 
strenuous physical activity. Since the heart has to work harder to meet the normal metabolic demands, it is 
incapable of meeting the metabolic demands of the body during exercise. 
A common finding in those with heart failure is an increased heart rate, stimulated by increased sympathetic 
activity[27] in order to maintain an adequate cardiac output. Initially, this helps compensate for heart failure by 
maintaining blood pressure and perfusion, but places further strain on the myocardium, increasing coronary 
perfusion requirements, which can lead to worsening of ischemic heart disease. Sympathetic activity may also 
cause potentially fatal abnormal heart rhythms. An increase in the physical size of the heart’s muscular layer may 
occur. This is caused by the terminally differentiated heart muscle fibers increasing in size in an attempt to improve 
contractility. This may contribute to the increased stiffness and decreased ability to relax during diastole. 
Enlargement of the ventricles can also occur and contributes to the enlargement and spherical shape of the failing 
heart. The increase in ventricular volume also causes a reduction in stroke volume due to mechanical and 
inefficient contraction of the heart.[28] 
The general effect is one of reduced cardiac output and increased strain on the heart. This increases the risk of 
cardiac arrest (specifically due to abnormal ventricular heart rhythms), and reduces blood supply to the rest of the 
body. In chronic disease the reduced cardiac output causes a number of changes in the rest of the body, some of 
which are physiological compensations, some of which are part of the disease process: 
• Arterial blood pressure falls. This destimulates baroreceptors in the carotid sinus and aortic arch which link 
to the nucleus tractus solitarii. This center in the brain increases sympathetic activity, releasing 
catecholamines into the blood stream. Binding to alpha-1 receptors results in systemic arterial 
vasoconstriction. This helps restore blood pressure but also increases the total peripheral resistance, 
increasing the workload of the heart. Binding to beta1 receptors in the myocardium increases the heart rate 
and makes contractions more forceful in an attempt to increase cardiac output. This also, however, increases 
the amount of work the heart has to perform. 
• Increased sympathetic stimulation also causes the posterior pituitary to secrete vasopressin (also known as 
antidiuretic hormone or ADH), which causes fluid retention at the kidneys. This increases the blood volume 
and blood pressure. 
• Reduced perfusion (blood flow) to the kidneys stimulates the release of renin – an enzyme which catalyses 
the production of the potent vasopressor angiotensin. Angiotensin and its metabolites cause further 
vasoconstriction, and stimulate increased secretion of the steroid aldosterone from the adrenal glands. This 
promotes salt and fluid retention at the kidneys. 
• The chronically high levels of circulating neuroendocrine hormones such as catecholamines, 
 4 PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
renin, angiotensin, and aldosterone affects the myocardium directly, causing structural remodelling of the 
heart over the long term. Many of these remodelling effects seem to be mediated by transforming growth 
factor beta (TGF-beta), which is a common downstream target of the signal transduction cascade initiated by 
catecholamines[29] and angiotensin II,[30] and also by epidermal growth factor (EGF), which is a target of the 
signaling pathway activated by aldosterone[31] 
• Reduced perfusion of skeletal muscle causes atrophy of the muscle fibers. This can result in weakness, 
increased fatigueability and decreased peak strength – all contributing to exercise intolerance.[32] 
The increased peripheral resistance and greater blood volume place further strain on the heart and accelerates the 
process of damage to the myocardium. Vasoconstriction and fluid retention produce an increased hydrostatic 
pressure in the capillaries. This shifts the balance of forces in favour of interstitial fluid formation as the increased 
pressure forces additional fluid out of the blood, into the tissue. This results in edema (fluid build-up) in the tissues. 
In right-sided heart failure this commonly starts in the ankles where venous pressure is high due to the effects of 
gravity (although if the patient is bed-ridden, fluid accumulation may begin in the sacral region.) It may also occur 
in the abdominal cavity, where the fluid build-up is called ascites. In left-sided heart failure edema can occur in 
6 
the lungs – this is called cardiogenic pulmonary edema. This reduces spare capacity for ventilation, causes 
stiffening of the lungs and reduces the efficiency of gas exchange by increasing the distance between the air and 
the blood. The consequences of this are dyspnea (shortness of breath), orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnea. 
The symptoms of heart failure are largely determined by which side of the heart fails. The left side pumps blood 
into the systemic circulation, whilst the right side pumps blood into the pulmonary circulation. Whilst left-sided 
heart failure will reduce cardiac output to the systemic circulation, the initial symptoms often manifest due to 
effects on the pulmonary circulation. In systolic dysfunction, the ejection fraction is decreased, leaving an 
abnormally elevated volume of blood in the left ventricle. In diastolic dysfunction, end-diastolic ventricular 
pressure will be high. This increase in volume or pressure backs up to the left atrium and then to the pulmonary 
veins. Increased volume or pressure in the pulmonary veins impairs the normal drainage of the alveoli and favors 
the flow of fluid from the capillaries to the lung parenchyma, causing pulmonary edema. This impairs gas 
exchange. Thus, leftsided heart failure often presents with respiratory symptoms: shortness of breath, orthopnea 
and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. 
In severe cardiomyopathy, the effects of decreased cardiac output and poor perfusion become more apparent, and 
patients will manifest with cold and clammy extrem- 
4.2 Diastolic dysfunction 
ities, cyanosis, claudication, generalized weakness, dizziness, and fainting. 
The resultant hypoxia caused by pulmonary edema causes vasoconstriction in the pulmonary circulation, which 
results in pulmonary hypertension. Since the right ventricle generates far lower pressures than the left ventricle 
(approximately 20 mmHg versus around 120 mmHg, respectively, in the healthy individual) but nonetheless 
generates cardiac output exactly equal to the left ventricle, this means that a small increase in pulmonary vascular 
resistance causes a large increase in amount of work the right ventricle must perform. However, the main 
mechanism by which left-sided heart failure causes right-sided heart failure is actually not well understood. Some 
theories invoke mechanisms that are mediated by neurohormonal activation.[33] Mechanical effects may also 
contribute. As the left ventricle distends, the intraventricular septum bows into the right ventricle, decreasing the 
capacity of the right ventricle. 
4.1 Systolic dysfunction 
Heart failure caused by systolic dysfunction is more readily recognized. It can be simplistically described as failure 
of the pump function of the heart. It is characterized by a decreased ejection fraction (less than 45%). The strength 
of ventricular contraction is attenuated and inadequate for creating an adequate stroke volume, resulting in 
inadequate cardiac output. In general, this is caused by dysfunction or destruction of cardiac myocytes or their 
molecular components. In congenital diseases such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the molecular structure of 
individual myocytes is affected. Myocytes and their components can be damaged by inflammation (such as in 
myocarditis) or by infiltration (such as in amyloidosis). Toxins and pharmacological agents (such as ethanol, 
cocaine, doxorubicin, and amphetamines) cause intracellular damage and oxidative stress. The most common 
mechanism of damage is ischemia causing infarction and scar formation. After myocardial infarction, dead 
myocytes are replaced by scar tissue, deleteriously affecting the function of the myocardium. On echocardiogram, 
this is manifest by abnormal wall motion (hypokinesia) or absent wall motion (akinesia). 
Because the ventricle is inadequately emptied, ventricular end-diastolic pressure and volumes increase. This is 
transmitted to the atrium. On the left side of the heart, the increased pressure is transmitted to the pulmonary 
vasculature, and the resultant hydrostatic pressure favors extravasation of fluid into the lung parenchyma, causing 
pulmonary edema. On the right side of the heart, the increased pressure is transmitted to the systemic venous 
circulation and systemic capillary beds, favoring extravasation of fluid into the tissues of target organs and 
extremities, resulting in dependent peripheral edema. 
7 
4.2 Diastolic dysfunction 
Heart failure caused by diastolic dysfunction is generally described as the failure of the ventricle to adequately 
relax and typically denotes a stiffer ventricular wall. This causes inadequate filling of the ventricle, and therefore 
results in an inadequate stroke volume. The failure of ventricular relaxation also results in elevated end-diastolic 
pressures, and the end result is identical to the case of systolic dysfunction (pulmonary edema in left heart failure, 
peripheral edema in right heart failure). 
Diastolic dysfunction can be caused by processes similar to those that cause systolic dysfunction, particularly 
causes that affect cardiac remodeling. 
Diastolic dysfunction may not manifest itself except in physiologic extremes if systolic function is preserved. The 
patient may be completely asymptomatic at rest. However, they are exquisitely sensitive to increases in heart rate, 
and sudden bouts of tachycardia (which can be caused simply by physiological responses to exertion, fever, or 
dehydration, or by pathological tachyarrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response) may 
result in flash pulmonary edema. Adequate rate control (usually with a pharmacological agent that slows down 
AV conduction such as a calcium channel blocker or a beta-blocker) is therefore key to preventing decompensation. 
Left ventricular diastolic function can be determined through echocardiography by measurement of various 
parameters such as the E/A ratio (early-to-atrial left ventricular filling ratio), the E (early left ventricular filling) 
deceleration time, and the isovolumic relaxation time. 
5 Diagnosis 
 
Acute pulmonary edema. Note enlarged heart size, apical vascular redistribution ( circle ), and small bilateral pleural effusions 
( arrow ). 
No system of diagnostic criteria has been agreed on as the gold standard for heart failure. The National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence recommends measuring brain natriuretic peptide followed by ultrasound of the 
heart if positive.[34] 
5.1 Imaging 
Echocardiography is commonly used to support a clinical diagnosis of heart failure. This modality uses ultrasound 
to determine the stroke volume (SV, the amount of blood in the heart that exits the ventricles with each beat), the 
end-diastolic volume (EDV, the total amount of blood at the end of diastole), and the SV in proportion to the EDV, 
a value known as the ejection fraction (EF). In pediatrics, the shortening fraction is the preferred measure of 
systolic function. Normally, the EF should be between 50% and 70%; in systolic heart failure, it drops below 40%. 
Echocardiography can also identify valvular heart disease and assess the state of the pericardium (the connective 
tissue sac surrounding the heart). Echocardiography may also aid in deciding what treatments will help the patient, 
such as medication, insertion of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator or cardiac resynchronization therapy. 
8 
Echocardiography can also help determine if acute myocardial ischemia is the precipitating cause, and may 
manifest as regional wall motion abnormalities on echo. 
Chest X-rays are frequently used to aid in the diagnosis of CHF. In a person who is compensated, this may show 
cardiomegaly (visible enlargement of the heart), quantified as the cardiothoracic ratio (proportion of the heart 
size to the chest). In left ventricular failure, there may be evidence of vascular redistribution (“upper lobe blood 
diversion” or “cephalization”), Kerley lines, cuffing of the areas around the bronchi, and interstitial edema. 
Ultrasound of the lung may also be able to detect Kerley lines.[35] 
5.2 Electrophysiology 
An electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) may be used to identify arrhythmias, ischemic heart disease, right and left 
ventricular hypertrophy, and presence of conduction delay or abnormalities (e.g. left bundle branch block). 
Although these findings are not specific to the diagnosis of heart failure a normal ECG virtually excludes left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction.[36] 
5.3 Blood tests 
Blood tests routinely performed include electrolytes (sodium, potassium), measures of renal function, liver 
function tests, thyroid function tests, a complete blood count, and often C-reactive protein if infection is suspected. 
An elevated B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) is 5 DIAGNOSIS 
a specific test indicative of heart failure. Additionally, BNP can be used to differentiate between causes of dyspnea 
due to heart failure from other causes of dyspnea. If myocardial infarction is suspected, various cardiac markers 
may be used. 
According to a meta-analysis comparing BNP and Nterminal pro-BNP (NTproBNP) in the diagnosis of heart 
failure, BNP is a better indicator for heart failure and left ventricular systolic dysfunction. In groups of 
symptomatic patients, a diagnostic odds ratio of 27 for BNP compares with a sensitivity of 85% and specificity of 
84% in detecting heart failure.[37] 
5.4 Angiography 
Heart failure may be the result of coronary artery disease, and its prognosis depends in part on the ability of the 
coronary arteries to supply blood to the myocardium (heart muscle). As a result, coronary catheterization may be 
used to identify possibilities for revascularisation through percutaneous coronary intervention or bypass surgery. 
5.5 Monitoring 
Various measures are often used to assess the progress of patients being treated for heart failure. These include 
fluid balance (calculation of fluid intake and excretion), monitoring body weight (which in the shorter term reflects 
fluid shifts).[38] 
5.6 Classification 
There are many different ways to categorize heart failure, including: 
• the side of the heart involved (left heart failure versus right heart failure). Right heart failure compromises 
pulmonary flow to the lungs. Left heart failure compromises aortic flow to the body and brain. Mixed 
presentations are common; left heart failure often leads to right heart failure in the longer term. 
9 
• whether the abnormality is due to insufficient contraction (systolic dysfunction), or due to insufficient 
relaxation of the heart (diastolic dysfunction), or to both. 
• whether the problem is primarily increased venous back pressure (preload), or failure to supply adequate 
arterial perfusion (afterload). • whether the abnormality is due to low cardiac output with high systemic 
vascular resistance or high cardiac output with low vascular resistance (low-output heart failure vs. high-
output heart failure). 
5.7 Algorithms • the degree of functional impairment conferred by the abnormality (as reflected in the New York 
Heart Association Functional Classification[39]) 
• the degree of coexisting illness: i.e. heart failure/systemic hypertension, heart failure/pulmonary hypertension, 
heart failure/diabetes, heart failure/kidney failure, etc. 
Functional classification generally relies on the New York Heart Association functional classification. The classes 
(I-IV) are: 
• Class I: no limitation is experienced in any activities; there are no symptoms from ordinary activities. 
• Class II: slight, mild limitation of activity; the patient is comfortable at rest or with mild exertion. • Class III: 
marked limitation of any activity; the patient is comfortable only at rest. 
• Class IV: any physical activity brings on discomfort and symptoms occur at rest. 
This score documents severity of symptoms, and can be used to assess response to treatment. While its use is 
widespread, the NYHA score is not very reproducible and does not reliably predict the walking distance or exercise 
tolerance on formal testing.[40] 
In its 2001 guidelines the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association working group introduced 
four stages of heart failure:[41] • Stage A: Patients at high risk for developing HF in the future but no functional or 
structural heart disorder. 
• Stage B: a structural heart disorder but no symptoms at any stage. 
• Stage C: previous or current symptoms of heart failure in the context of an underlying structural heart 
problem, but managed with medical treatment. 
• Stage D: advanced disease requiring hospital-based support, a heart transplant or palliative care. 
The ACC staging system is useful in that Stage A encompasses “pre-heart failure” – a stage where intervention 
with treatment can presumably prevent progression to overt symptoms. ACC Stage A does not have a 
corresponding NYHA class. ACC Stage B would correspond to NYHA Class I. ACC Stage C corresponds to 
NYHA Class II and III, while ACC Stage D overlaps with NYHA Class IV. 
5.7 Algorithms 
There are various algorithms for the diagnosis of heart failure. For example, the algorithm used by the Framingham 
Heart Study adds together criteria mainly from physical examination. In contrast, the more extensive algorithm 
by the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) weights the difference between supporting and opposing parameters 
from the medical history, physical examination, further medical tests as well as response to therapy. 
10 
5.7.1 Framingham criteria 
By the Framingham criteria, diagnosis of congestive heart failure (heart failure with impaired pumping 
capability)[17] requires the simultaneous presence of at least 2 of the following major criteria or 1 major criterion 
in conjunction with 2 of the following minor criteria. Major criteria include an enlarged heart on a chest xray, an 
S3 gallop (a third heart sound), acute pulmonary edema, episodes of waking up from sleep gasping for air, crackles 
on lung auscultation, central venous pressure of more than 16 cm H 
2O at the right atrium, jugular vein distension, positive abdominojugular test, and weight loss of more than 4.5 kg 
in 5 days in response to treatment (sometimes[42] classified as a minor criterion).[43] Minor criteria include an 
abnormally fast heart rate of more than 120 beats per minute, nocturnal cough, difficulty breathing with physical 
activity, pleural effusion, a decrease in the vital capacity by one third from maximum recorded, liver enlargement, 
and bilateral ankle swelling.[43] 
Minor criteria are acceptable only if they can not be attributed to another medical condition such as pulmonary 
hypertension, chronic lung disease, cirrhosis, ascites, or the nephrotic syndrome.[43] The Framingham Heart Study 
criteria are 100% sensitive and 78% specific for identifying persons with definite congestive heart failure.[43] 
5.7.2 ESC algorithm 
The ESC algorithm weights the following parameters in establishing the diagnosis of heart failure:[44] 
5.8 Differential diagnosis 
There are several terms which are closely related to heart failure, and may be the cause of heart failure, but should 
not be confused with it. Cardiac arrest and asystole refer to situations in which there is no cardiac output at all. 
Without urgent treatment these result in sudden death. Myocardial infarction (“Heart attack”) refers to heart 
muscle damage due to insufficient blood supply, usually as a result of a blocked coronary artery. Cardiomyopathy 
refers specifically to problems within the heart muscle, and these problems can result in heart failure. Ischemic 
cardiomyopathy implies that the cause of muscle damage is coronary artery disease. Dilated cardiomyopathy 
implies that the muscle damage has resulted in enlargement of the heart. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy involves 
enlargement and thickening of the heart muscle. 
6 Management 
Main article: Management of heart failure 
Treatment focuses on improving the symptoms and preventing the progression of the disease. Reversible causes 
of the heart failure also need to be addressed (e.g. infection, alcohol ingestion, anemia, thyrotoxicosis, arrhythmia, 
hypertension). Treatments include lifestyle and pharmacological modalities, and occasionally various forms of 
device therapy and rarely cardiac transplantation. 
6.1 Acute decompensation 
Main article: Acute decompensated heart failure 
In acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF), the immediate goal is to re-establish adequate perfusion and oxygen 
delivery to end organs. This entails ensuring that airway, breathing, and circulation are adequate. Immediate 
treatments usually involve some combination of vasodilators such as nitroglycerin, diuretics such as furosemide, 
and possibly non invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV). 
11 
6.2 Chronic management 
The goals of treatment for people with chronic heart failure are the prolongation of life, the prevention of acute 
decompensation and the reduction of symptoms, allowing for greater activity. 
Heart failure can result from a variety of conditions. In considering therapeutic options, it is important to first 
exclude reversible causes, including thyroid disease, anemia, chronic tachycardia, alcohol abuse, hypertension 
and dysfunction of one or more heart valves. Treatment of the underlying cause is usually the first approach in 
treating heart failure. However, in the majority of cases, either no primary cause is found or treatment of the 
primary cause does not restore normal heart function. In these cases, behavioral, medical and device treatment 
strategies exist which can provide significant improvement in outcomes, including the relief of symptoms, 
exercise tolerance, and a decrease in the likelihood of hospitalization or death. 
 6 MANAGEMENT 
6.2.1 Lifestyle 
Behavioral modification is a primary consideration in any chronic heart failure management program, with dietary 
guidelines regarding fluid and salt intake being of particular importance.[45] 
Exercise should be encouraged and tailored to suit individual capabilities. The inclusion of regular physical 
conditioning as part of a cardiac rehabilitation program can significantly improve quality of life and reduce the 
risk of hospital admission for worsening symptoms however there is no evidence for a reduction in mortality rates 
as a result of exercise. Furthermore, it is not clear whether this evidence can be extended to people with heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) or to those whose exercise regimen takes place entirely at 
home.[46] 
Home visits and regular monitoring at heart failure clinics reduce the need for hospitalization and improve life 
expectancy.[47] 
6.2.2 Medication 
First-line therapy for people with heart failure due to reduced systolic function should include 
angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (ACE-I) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). Use of 
medicines from this class are associated with improved survival and quality of life in people with heart failure.[48] 
Beta-adrenergic blocking agents (beta blockers) also form part of the first line of treatment, adding to the 
improvement in symptoms and mortality provided by ACEI/ARB.[48] The mortality benefits of beta blockers in 
people with systolic dysfunction who also have atrial fibrillation (AF) is more limited than in those who do not 
have AF.[49] If the ejection fraction is not diminished (HFpEF), the benefits of beta blockers is more modest; a 
decrease in mortality has been observed but reduction in hospital admission for uncontrolled symptoms has not 
been observed.[50] 
In people who are intolerant of ACE-I and ARBs or who have significant renal dysfunction, the use of combined 
hydralazine and a long-acting nitrate, such as isosorbide dinitrate, are an effective alternative. This regimen has 
been shown to reduce mortality in people with moderate heart failure.[51] It is especially beneficial in 
AfricanAmericans (AA).[51] In AAs who are symptomatic, hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate (H+I) can be added 
to ACE-I or ARBs. 
In people with markedly reduced ejection fraction, the use of an aldosterone antagonist, in addition to beta blockers 
and ACE-I, can improve symptoms and reduce 
mortality.[52][53] 
Second-line drugs for CHF do not confer a mortality benefit. Digitalis is one such drug. Its narrow therapeutic 
window, high degree of toxicity, and the failure of multi- 
12 
6.3 Palliative care 
ple trials to show a mortality benefit have reduced its role in clinical practice. It is now used in only a small number 
of people with refractory symptoms, who are in atrial fibrillation and/or who have chronic low blood pressure. 
Diuretics have been a mainstay of treatment for treatment of fluid accumulation, and include diuretics classes such 
as loop diuretics, thiazide-like diuretic, and potassiumsparing diuretic. Although widely used, evidence on their 
efficacy and safety is limited, with the exception of spironolactone antagonists.[52][54] A recent Cochrane review 
found that in small studies, the use of diuretics appeared to have improved mortality in individuals with heart 
failure.[55] However, the extent to which these results can be extrapolated to a general population is unclear due to 
the small number of participants in the cited 
studies.[54] 
Anemia is an independent factor in mortality in people with chronic heart failure. The treatment of anemia 
significantly improves quality of life for those with heart failure, often with a reduction in severity of the NYHA 
classification, and also improves mortality rates.[56][57] The latest European guidelines (2012) recommend 
screening for iron-deficient anemia and treating with parenteral iron if anemia is found.[58] 
6.2.3 Minimally invasive therapies 
In people with severe cardiomyopathy (left ventricular ejection fraction below 35%), or in those with recurrent 
VT or malignant arrhythmias, treatment with an automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator (AICD) is 
indicated to reduce the risk of severe life-threatening arrhythmias. The AICD does not improve symptoms or 
reduce the incidence of malignant arrhythmias, but does reduce mortality from those arrhythmias, often in 
conjunction with antiarrhythmic medications. In people with left ventricular ejection (LVEF) below 35%, the 
incidence of ventricular tachycardia (VT) or sudden cardiac death is high enough to warrant AICD placement. Its 
use is therefore recommended in AHA/ACC guidelines.[14] 
Cardiac contractility modulation (CCM) is a treatment for people with moderate to severe left ventricular systolic 
heart failure (NYHA class II–IV) which enhances both the strength of ventricular contraction and the heart’s 
pumping capacity. The CCM mechanism is based on stimulation of the cardiac muscle by nonexcitatory electrical 
signals (NES), which are delivered by a pacemaker-like device. CCM is particularly suitable for the treatment of 
heart failure with normal QRS complex duration (120 ms or less) and has been demonstrated to improve the 
symptoms, quality of life and exercise tolerance.[15][59][60][61][62] CCM is approved for use in Europe, but not 
currently in North America.[63][64] 
About one third of people with LVEF below 35% have markedly altered conduction to the ventricles, resulting in 
dyssynchronous depolarization of the right and left ventricles. This is especially problematic in people with left 
bundle branch block (blockage of one of the two primary conducting fiber bundles that originates at the base of 
the heart and carries depolarizing impulses to the left ventricle). Using a special pacing algorithm, biventricular 
cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) can initiate a normal sequence of ventricular depolarization. In people 
with LVEF below 35% and prolonged QRS duration on ECG (LBBB or QRS of 150 ms or more) there is an 
improvement in symptoms and mortality when CRT is added to standard medical therapy.[65] However, in the two 
thirds of people without prolonged QRS duration, 
CRT may actually be harmful.[14][15][66] 
6.2.4 Surgical therapies 
People with the most severe heart failure may be candidates for ventricular assist devices (VAD). VADs have 
commonly been used as a bridge to heart transplantation, but have been used more recently as a destination 
treatment for advanced heart failure.[67] 
In select cases, heart transplantation can be considered. While this may resolve the problems associated with heart 
failure, the person must generally remain on an immunosuppressive regimen to prevent rejection, which has its 
own significant downsides.[68] A major limitation of this treatment option is the scarcity of hearts available for 
transplantation. 
13 
6.3 Palliative care 
People with CHF often have significant symptoms, such as shortness of breath and chest pain. Both palliative care 
and cardiology are trying to get palliative care involved earlier in the course of patients with heart failure, and 
some would argue any patient with NYHA class III CHF should have a palliative care referral. Palliative care can 
not only provide symptom management, but also assist with advanced care planning, goals of care in the case of 
a significant decline, and making sure the patient has a medical power of attorney and discussed his or her wishes 
with this individual.[69] 
Without transplantation, heart failure may not be reversible and cardiac function typically deteriorates with time. 
The growing number of patients with Stage IV heart failure (intractable symptoms of fatigue, shortness of breath 
or chest pain at rest despite optimal medical therapy) should be considered for palliative care or hospice, according 
to American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines.[69] 
7 Prognosis 
Prognosis in heart failure can be assessed in multiple ways including clinical prediction rules and cardiopulmonary 
exercise testing. Clinical prediction rules use a composite of clinical factors such as lab tests and blood pressure 
to estimate prognosis. Among several clinical prediction rules for prognosing acute heart failure, the 'EFFECT 
rule' slightly outperformed other rules in stratifying patients and identifying those at low risk of death during 
hospitalization or within 30 days.[70] Easy methods for identifying low risk patients are: • ADHERE Tree rule 
indicates that patients with blood urea nitrogen < 43 mg/dl and systolic blood pressure at least 115 mm Hg have 
less than 10% chance of inpatient death or complications. • BWH rule indicates that patients with systolic blood 
pressure over 90 mm Hg, respiratory rate of 30 or less breaths per minute, serum sodium over 135 mmol/L, no 
new ST-T wave changes have less than 10% chance of inpatient death or complications. 
A very important method for assessing prognosis in advanced heart failure patients is cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing (CPX testing). CPX testing is usually required prior to heart transplantation as an indicator of prognosis. 
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing involves measurement of exhaled oxygen and carbon dioxide during exercise. 
The peak oxygen consumption (VO2 max) is used as an indicator of prognosis. As a general rule, a VO2 max less 
than 12–14 cc/kg/min indicates a poor survival and suggests that the patient may be a candidate for a heart 
transplant. Patients with a VO2 max<10 cc/kg/min have clearly poorer prognosis. The most recent International 
Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) guidelines[71] also suggest two other parameters that can be 
used for evaluation of prognosis in advanced heart failure, the heart failure survival score and the use of a criterion 
of VE/VCO2 slope > 35 from the CPX test. The heart failure survival score is a score calculated using a 
combination of clinical predictors and the VO2 max from the cardiopulmonary exercise test. 
Heart failure is associated with significantly reduced physical and mental health, resulting in a markedly decreased 
quality of life.[72][73] With the exception of heart failure caused by reversible conditions, the condition usually 
worsens with time. Although some people survive many years, progressive disease is associated with an overall 
annual mortality rate of 10%.[74] 
8 Epidemiology 
Heart failure is associated with a high health expenditure, mostly because of the cost of hospitalizations; costs 
have been estimated to amount to 2% of the total budget of the National Health Service in the United Kingdom, 
and more than $35 billion in the United States.[75][76] 
Heart failure is the leading cause of hospitalization in people older than 65.[77] In developed countries, the mean 8
 EPIDEMIOLOGY 
age of patients with heart failure is 75 years old. In developing countries, two to three percent of the population 
have heart failure, but in those 70 to 80 years old, it occurs in 20–30 percent. 
14 
More than 20 million people have heart failure worldwide.[78][79] The prevalence and incidence of heart failure are 
increasing, mostly because of increasing life span, but also because of increased prevalence of risk factors 
(hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, and obesity) and improved survival rates from other types of cardiovascular 
disease (myocardial infarction, valvular disease, and arrhythmias).[79][80] 
In the United States, heart failure affects 5.8 million people, and each year 550,000 new cases are diagnosed.[78] 
In 2011, congestive heart failure was the most common reason for hospitalization for adults aged 85 years and 
older, and the second most common for adults aged 65– 84 years.[81] It is estimated that one in five adults at age 
40 will develop heart failure during their remaining lifetime and about half of people who develop heart failure 
die within 5 years of diagnosis.[82] Heart failure is much higher in African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans 
and recent immigrants from the eastern bloc countries like Russia. This high prevalence in these ethnic minority 
populations has been linked to high incidence of diabetes and hypertension. In many new immigrants to the U.S., 
the high prevalence of heart failure has largely been attributed to lack of preventive health care or substandard 
treatment.[83] Nearly one out of every four patients (24.7%) hospitalized in the U.S. with congestive heart failure 
are readmitted within 30 days.[84] Additionally, more than 50% of patients seek re-admission within 6 months after 
treatment and the average duration of hospital stay is 6 days. 
In tropical countries, the most common cause of HF is valvular heart disease or some type of cardiomyopathy. As 
underdeveloped countries have become more affluent, there has also been an increase in the incidence of diabetes, 
hypertension and obesity, which have in turn raised the incidence of heart failure.[85] 
Congestive heart failure is a leading cause of hospital readmissions in the U.S. In a study of 18 States, Medicare 
patients aged 65 and older were readmitted at a rate of 24.5 per 100 admissions in 2011. In the same year, Medicaid 
patients were readmitted at a rate of 30.4 per 100 admissions, and uninsured patients were readmitted at a rate of 
16.8 per 100 admissions. These are the highest readmission rates for both patient categories. Notably, congestive 
heart failure was not among the top ten conditions with the most 30-day readmissions among the privately 
insured.[86] 
8.1 Sex 
Men have a higher incidence of heart failure, but the overall prevalence rate is similar in both sexes, since women 
survive longer after the onset of heart failure.[87] Women tend to be older when diagnosed with heart failure (after 
menopause), they are more likely than men to have diastolic dysfunction, and seem to experience a lower overall 
quality of life than men after diagnosis.[87] 
9 Economics 
In 2011, non-hypertensive congestive heart failure was one of the ten most expensive conditions seen during 
inpatient hospitalizations in the U.S., with aggregate inpatient hospital costs of more than $10.5 billion.[88] 
10 Research 
There is low quality evidence that stem cell therapy may help.[89] Although this evidence positively indicated 
benefit, the evidence was of lower quality than other evidence that does not indicate benefit.[90] 
A previous claim, which came from a 2012 article published by the British Journal Heart, stated that a low salt 
diet increased the risk of death in those with congestive heart failure. This claim has since been withdrawn. The 
paper was retracted by the journal in 2013 because two of the cited studies contained duplicate data that could not 
be verified, and the data has since been lost.[91][92][93] 
 
